Israel intensifies military operations
in Gaza that's despite the UN stop Court
ordering it to immediately hold its
assault on Rafa it's not the first time
Israel has refused to comply with an
order from the world court so what's the
point of these measures and how can they
be enforced this is Inside Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
fuli batibo the international court of
justice has ordered Israel to stop its
assault on Rafa the order is one of
three issued by the un's top Court in
the genocide case brought by South
Africa against Israel over its war on
Gaza Israel has long declared it plans
to intensify its assault on the southern
city saying it's necessary to dism Hamas
and it appears it plans to follow
through with that strategy the icj's
rulings are final and legally binding
but it doesn't have a way to enforce
them so does this latest order carry any
weight and will it affect events on the
ground and how will prime minister
Netanyahu manage increased pressure at
home and abroad we'll explore these
questions with our guests in just a
moment but first this report by K Lopez
hyan it's a signific ific an move for
the un's top Court a landmark emergency
ruling ordering Israel to stop its
assault on Rafa Israel must immediately
hold its military offensive and any
other action in the Rafa Governor which
may inflict on the Palestinian group in
Gaza conditions of life that could bring
about its physical destruction in whole
or in
part but shortly after the international
court of justice issued its ruling
Israeli forces intensified their attacks
wiping out entire
neighborhoods the ruling is part of a
wider legal case that began with South
Africa accusing Israel of genocide in
Gaza many Palestinians doubt any of the
Court's orders will change things or
stop the government of Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu from moving
forward with the
offensive I hope Israel will comply but
it hasn't cared about Court's rulings or
even its allies in the
past Israel will continue the massacres
Israel is a state above the law and no
one can stop
it as part of the ruling Israel was
ordered to reopen the Rafa border
crossing and allow Aid into Gaza famine
is already affecting parts of the North
and the World Health Organization says
it can spread across the strip
fast Israeli officials have condemned
demed the icj's ruling the government
says it's defending itself and fighting
Hamas and some Israelis agree the fact
that they're even having this
conversation is quite ludicrous to be
honest I think that we have women young
women we have men we have elderly
individuals that have been taken hostage
and while Israel is a signatory to the
Geneva conventions the icj has no means
to enforce its orders many analysts now
question whether the ruling like other
legal motions will be dismissed by
Israel and if so if there will be
consequences states can choose to take
countermeasures uh against other states
uh non-violent counter measures would
include things like economic sanctions
for example um in order to induce
enforcement all of that depends
obviously on the the political will in
the
situation for now Palestinians in Gaza
must wait to see if the icj's court
orders will extend beyond
words kope oan Al jazer for insight
story well let's now bring in our guests
for today's show joining us in occupied
East Jerusalem is mammed D who is a
lawyer and a founder of an East
Jerusalem Law Firm that practices in the
Israeli and Palestinian legal systems in
Tel Aviv Alan Nel a former Israeli
Diplomat who served as Israel's
ambassador to South Africa and in London
William shabas he's an international law
expert and a professor at middle sex
University gentlemen thank you for
joining us on inside or a warm welcome
to all of you uh Muhammad D if I can
start with you a legally binding order
from the international uh court of
justice for Israel to stop its offensive
on Rafa are you at all hopeful the
Israelis will heed this call at some
point in time so far it doesn't seem to
be the
case yeah it hasn't been the case but I
think that the Israeli Army and that the
Israeli government cannot continue to
ignore international law in this case a
specific
International court order this is a a
clear order this time and it talks about
a specific area the the RAF area and I
think that this time with
the warrant orders the the arrest orders
by the IC also waiting for bam Netanyahu
and Galant I think that the Israeli
government will think twice this time
when they decide on their future actions
in Rafa so it's not it it is Bing Israel
hasn't been following international law
in the past but I think with this
current order they will uh they will
they will treat it in a different way I
don't think that the Israeli government
can continue to violate international
law can continue not to comply with
orders issued by the international court
of justice the high highest court in the
world and get away with it I think this
time they know that the time has come
for Israel really to comply with these
orders and to comply with the
international law and if they don't do
so then the risks of uh arrest warrants
for the two gentlemen that we spoke
about and maybe others the risk is is
getting higher and higher okay Alan Neel
your thoughts will Netanyahu completely
ignore this order will the Israeli
government continue to defy the highest
court of international
law in Israel the interpretation is
different ER the Israeli government sees
the order as to stop the violence once
or if it is inflicting damage on
civilians and the Israeli government say
we are not
inflicting any damage or casualties on
civilians
and will go on with a war in Rafa ER I
think although Israel has a different
interpretation it'll be very cautious
especially when it comes to
civilians but I don't think Israel
intends to end the
war H what can H maybe force Israel to
do so is if these orders go to the UN
Security Council
for another vote and we'll need another
American veto then a new procedure will
start okay I'll ask you a little bit
more about what we can expect at the UN
Security Council in a moment let me
bring in William shabas into the
conversation uh William Alan leel says
there is in Israel that there's a very
different interpretation of this law but
as Muhammad D said it's it's a very
clear order this time from the
international court of justice a very
specific ruling unlike the two previous
this once the court is ordering Israel
to stop the the military operation in
Rafa to allow humanitarian Aid in
through Rafa and other Crossings how
much weight does this ruling carry uh
despite Israel ignoring previous rulings
of the
Court well I totally agree I think the
ruling uh and the order from the court
couldn't be much clearer than it is and
the the idea that Israel can interpret
this in some way that allows it to
continue with its military offensive is
is quite Preposterous and I think the
whole world will will see that um of
course it's clear now that Israel
doesn't intend to comply with it
whatever uh whatever contrived
interpretation it develops about the
order and as as everyone knows there is
not an enforcement mechanism as such the
enforc what's the purpose then of these
measures William shabas if they're going
to be ignored well you don't know that
they're going to be ignored until you
order them and I think that for most
countries who've been on the receiving
end of these orders historically they do
comply with them and so South Africa has
no alternative it has to go to the court
to get the orders um and then hopefully
political pressure will be put on Israel
to get it to comply already we're seeing
the consequences on Israel uh with many
of its allies and Friends many of the
countries that have been very supportive
and friendly to Israel are losing their
taste for this um partly because they
also value and and respect the
international court of justice they
can't stomach Israel's attitude of of
absolute disdain for an order by a court
Israel accepted this Israel never had to
ratify the genocide convention but once
it did it opened the door to orders from
the international court of justice and
it it is it is obliged to respect them
Alan how does Israel continue to justify
rejecting these orders from uh the
international court of justice is Israel
Above the
Law no I explained how Israel justifies
it it takes the word if it may inflict
and so on but H the headlines in the
world are that the court ordered Israel
to end the operation in Rafa and
definitely this will trigger more
criticism some of it probably in the UN
and some of it
bilaterally I don't think this
International court of justice order is
standing on its own you have
simultaneously several things happening
now in Israel's pH relations that are
causing what we call here a tsunami or a
diplomatic tsunami and Israel has to
look at the wider picture definitely we
are losing support in more and more
parts of the world especially in Europe
now that is seen as very important to us
yeah certainly Alan leel this has been a
bad week for Israel How concerned are
Israelis about this growing
International pressure and this growing
International isolation it's not just
this latest ruling by the international
court of justice it's also the ICC
seeking to issue arrest warrants against
uh Israeli leaders and also Hamas
leaders and some very important European
countries as you mentioned who are now
demanding uh that an independent
Palestinian State be established how
does this resonate with the Israeli
public at
large the Israeli public is not too
concerned unfortunately an attitude was
developed with most of the Israel public
that no matter what we do the world will
be against us as the world is by
definition
anti-semitic so there is a tendency to
overlook what's happening in the
International Community on the other end
many Israelis are really really worried
that if H we end the war Hamas will have
a comeback and will attack us again
so this is the the feeling in the public
however netan will be the one making the
decision he he can decide on its on his
own he has in his cabinet some ministers
say let's go the diplomatic way others
are pushing for the military way and he
has to the side yeah all right Muhammad
Dal your thoughts about this Alan Neel
says there a different interpretation of
this latest ruling by Israel and the
Israel views these decisions made uh at
the international uh level as
anti-semitic what do you make of
this well I think as you know Israel has
sent a judge adhoc judge Barack who is
part of the international court of
justice and I think now Israel is trying
basically to base its case on his
descending opinion in his opinion he
tried to say that actually the
international court of justice is not
ordering a total freeze of the military
offense in Rafa but actually it it does
so with certain conditions that if they
are met uh then Israel uh should stop
the operation but if Israel doesn't
inflict this
physical damage to the Palestinian civil
population then the operation can
continue so that's the expl explanation
that Barack in his opinion when it was
issued that what he actually presented
to the Israeli government to the Israeli
attorney general basically giving advice
to the Israeli Army yet reading the
decision uh of the 13 judges in the
court they say that actually there is no
way to uh operate in Rafa without
inflicting this damage on the civilian
population they mentioned what Israel
has tried to do with the several
hundreds Palestinians that they
evacuated from Rafa to al- maasi area
and other areas and they the court says
in its ruling that those areas are not
adequate for habilitation people cannot
really live there there are no houses no
water no sewage nothing therefore the
interpretation given by the Israelis I
think will not be accepted by anybody in
the world but that's the that's how
Israel got away with it until now all
the time Israel has its own
interpretation to international law
including International humanitarian law
and that was only an Israeli
interpretation that was different from
what the World Scholars think about
International humanitarian law briefly
Muhammad Dal before I bring uh William
back into the conversation the ruling
also says Israel has to allow un
investigators into Gaza uh to to
investigate the genocide case right
what's the likelihood of that happening
of Israel allowing investigators into
the
territory it hasn't allowed in the past
several un inquiry commissions were
supposed to come to the Palestinian
territories in the past based on
different uh resolutions of the United
Nations General Assembly uh human rights
Council or other committees and Israel
in the past hasn't been cooperative and
this time I don't think it's going to be
any different Israel this is actually
this this shows the case of Gaza Gaza
has been besieged Gaza is still under
isra full control from the sea from the
air and uh from the the border the
territorial borders no one can enter
Gaza without an Israeli permit or an
Israeli consent and Israel is the only
one who decides who comes and who goes
out of Gaza
therefore I think that the Israelis will
not allow the the the you know the
investigators to come in so far they
haven't been able to do that even Karim
Karim Khan the the the Attorney General
of the IC was not able to enter Gaza he
only came to the ra Cross Point and but
he was not able to get to get inside
Gaza he visited the Israeli kuim inside
Israel but he wasn't was n able to get
inside Gaza although he got the
information from other un agencies but
entering into Gaza is a totally
different story so unlikely to happen
all the time is hindering that unlikely
to happen then William uh will a
Defiance of this order uh my
understanding is that uh there's no
immediate sanction for violating the
provisional orders issued by the uh
International court of justice but does
the ruling have broader implications for
the genocide case that Israel is
facing well in principle it doesn't it's
a preliminary ruling about an urgent
situation and it's without prejudice as
we lawyers say to the merits of the case
but clearly the attitude and the
violence it's we we consense the
attitude of the judges already I I think
Israel's approach in reading this order
in this very technical Manner and
suggesting that somehow it allows them
to continue with business as usual is
really not a reading in good faith you
have to read the judgments you have to
read what the other members of the Court
have said in their individual opinions
and one cons sense that this is a court
that is getting more angrier and angrier
and and more and more impatient with
Israel so Israel is not heading into a
good place in this case of course
there's going to be a great debate when
this finally goes on the merits but it's
not it's not looking good for Israel in
terms of its future at the international
court of justice what about at the
international criminal court will a
Defiance of this order by Israel affect
the pre-trial chamber of the ICC which
is currently debating whether to issue
arrest warrants against Israeli
leaders not technically of course not
because it has no the the two are not
directly related in any way but uh again
what we can see here listen there are 13
judges of the court from all over the
world from countries that are friendly
to Israel as well as countries that are
perhaps less friendly to Israel and
they're unanimous about this we can
expect the same kind of sentiment the
same kind of mood amongst the three
judges at the pre-trial chamber of the
international uh Criminal Court who are
going to have to rule in the coming
weeks on the prosecutor's application
for the arrest warrants of course we
can't foresee what they'll decide but
this sets the tone and I I think we we
can anticipate that those arrest
warrants will be issued and there are
all kinds of other sort of soft effects
of this that go outside of the legal
sphere altogether and we've made
reference to them already the fact that
there's an increasing number a growing
momentum of states to recognize
Palestine as a state and probably open
the door still the United States is an
obstacle but it's the last only the last
obstacle to admitting Palestine as a
full member state of the United Nations
right and Muhammad I'll ask you about uh
about this the us being this obstacle uh
but let me just uh get Alan neel's
thoughts about what uh uh William said
there I mean what happens Alan if these
arrest warrants are issued Israel's
credibility has uh radically diminished
within the course of this war on Gaza
there's a shifting perception today in
the world of Israel as a law abiding uh
democracy what would it mean for Israel
to lose that status and to be treated as
a non-democracy
oh as far as I remember remember uh
124 countries members of the
international criminal court H will have
to arrest netan and Gallant our Minister
of Defense if orders are issued so this
definitely is quite an embarrassment and
quite a complication to our H for
relations Israel will try to undermine
it
legally ER the visits to the United
States are still possible even if orders
will be issued because the United States
is not a member of the
IC I think at this stage from all the
discussion the issue that is the most
urgent one in Israeli eyes is if it will
reach the security Council because as
far as I understand every one of the 15
members of the security Council can now
pull it to a discussion there and in the
security Council it'll be very difficult
for the United States to vote against a
verdict or an order of the international
court of justice so in a way we are
complicating the international situation
of the United States If It Moves again
to the security Council so a lot is
happening
simultaneously
definitely embarrassing to Israel
embarrassing to Israel Muhammad D only
the security Council has the power to
enforce these rulings by the
international court of justice but as
we've heard from both uh William and
Alan there it's likely that the the US
will veto uh any moves at the security
Council so what then should be done to
uh enforce uh these rulings and and how
difficult a position does this put the
US in I mean they've backed Israel uh
through in throughout this conflict how
difficult will it be for them if this
gets to the security
Council I think it puts the United
States in a very difficult position I
mean for how long can the the the US use
the veto to rescue Israel from its
troubles and from the troubles that they
are putting the United States in as well
and we're not talking about the IC now
we have heard what the Israelis are
asking the the US Administration to do
to the IC attorney general and to the
judges and to the employes at the IC
they want them to sanction the court we
haven't heard such a thing ever I mean
asking the superpower to sanction an
international court for issuing or for
issuing a motion only for the time being
uh to ask for an arrest warrant for war
criminals uh this is UN unheard of un
think of but now we are moving to the
ICC and the ICC is an organ of the
United Nations and the United States is
part of that of that order it's part of
the IC it's part of the United Nations
unlike the sorry it's part of the
icj which the United States is not part
of it it's not the United States in a
very awkward position uhuh uh and and
and and basically saying that this uh
you know world or order that we
established after the second world war
which includes the UN Charter and it
includes the international court of
justice and so many other International
covenants and conventions and agreements
that are supposed to regulate relations
between peoples between countries
between states that those are actually
are not applicable in the case of Israel
the United States has been under a huge
embarrassment for its treatment to
Israel in this current conflict not now
only but throughout the years and now
it's in in really a very very bad
position if it continues to use that
veto because it's going to be clear for
all the International Community that
that this move is against international
law and against International jti let me
get William's thoughts about this
William how much does this heighten the
cost for the Biden Administration as it
continues to be Israel's sole guarantor
and Defender and what are the next steps
as far as International law is concerned
I mean they what are the obligations of
third States in this
case you know I wouldn't underestimate
the ability of the United States to be
hypocritical on these subjects the
United States has been keenly supporting
the international criminal court when
it's investigating the Russians in
Ukraine despite the fact that it claims
that the court has no jurisdiction over
people who aren't citizens of a member
State now of course they're raising that
objection and they're going to be uh
trying to take measures apparently to
block the work of the court it's not the
first time they've done it they tried
back in 2002 when it looked like the
Rome statute was going to enter enter
into Force which it did of course and
then they tried under the Trump
Administration but these were really
quite pathetic efforts that had no teeth
in them uh in in reality they had very
little in the way of practical
consequences and and I don't see that
they thought up anything brilliant since
then that could actually inflict pain
it's a annoyance it's an annoyance
disgraceful that they're doing it but
but it's not going to stop the
international criminal court proceeding
with what what it is set up to do okay
uh Alan leel is Israel and the Israeli
government likely to reevaluate its
position uh in the face of intensifying
international pressure and intensifying
isolation uh it's a difficult question
because uh um
I don't know if this wave will continue
but if it will continue if both courts
the IC and icj will go on with the
pressures if the security Council will
go on voting if more European countries
will recognize Palestine if it will end
up with the America in a
certain time not
Ving then Israel will have to listen
I think we are at a critical Junction if
we give up on our International standing
and focus on our security or if we go
after 100%
security because of the pressure of the
Israeli population the Israeli
government will have to decide if to go
now the military way or the Diplomatic
way thank you gentlemen for a very
interesting
conversation thank you very much for
joining us Muhammad D Alan leel William
shabas thank you to all three of
you and thank you too for watching you
can always watch this program again
anytime by visiting our website at
aljazeera.com for further discussion go
to our Facebook page that's facebook.com
AJ insidestory and of course you can
join the conversation on X our handle is
at AJ inside story from me fly btio and
the whole team here in Doha thank thank
you for watching bye for
[Music]
now make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer